Hard at it, Will? That's the spirit.
Got to keep the cash coming in.
I mean, all this ale and pie I'm
quaffing and gorging does not buy
itself.
No, Kit.
And now that thou hast faked
thine own death
and must ever crash upon mine couch,
my household bills soareth most
steeply.
Well, establishing a new identity
takes time.
Yes, particularly if done
from a horizontal position.
What are you writing, then? Another
Henry?
You haven't churned one of those out
in at least a fortnight.
I imagine all London is gagging
for Henry XIX, Part 12.
No, not a history, Kit.
Burbage demands yet another comedy.
I think he's right, people need
escapism.
We're living in dangerous times.
Yeah, look at me -
I got killed in a fight.
And now the hungriest,
thirstiest corpse in Southwark.
Burbage also wants romance,
so I've decided to set the play in
Venice,
city of carnival, city of light.
City of stink, more like. I've been
there.
They've combined the transport
system with the sewage system
and float about
on a shimmering sea of turdingtons.
That's why they're developing
opera -
keeps them breathing through their
mouths.
Well, I certainly can't think
of any other reason for developing
opera.
What's the story, master?
I like a bit of the old soppy stuff.
Well, Portia, a noble lady,
has many suitors,
so her father devises
a brilliant test of character
to discover the right man
for his beloved child.
He hides his permission
in one of three boxes -
a gold box,
a silver box and a lead box.
Now, here's the stunner.
The permission is contained
within...
BOTH: The lead box.
..the lead bo...
How did you know that?
Well, cos it's obvious.
Why?
If you were offered a gold casket,
a silver one or a lead one,
you'd choose the gold one.
Yeah, but you didn't say, "Choose
a casket and you can keep it,"
you said it were a test of
character.
And gloriously, stunningly
obviously, the lucky note's going to
be concealed
in the least showy and ostentatious
box.
Duh!
Well, I think it's brilliant,
and you're just jealous
cos you didn't think of it.
Yeah, well, nor did you, as it
happens.
I bloomin' did!
Sorry, mate, you pinched it
from a collection of medieval
stories
called Gesta Romanorum,
which Kate's reading
and which she leaves in the privy.
Well, I...
..I may have glanced at it
while awaiting the appearance
of that which the cockney
costermongers have,
in tribute to me and in the manner
of their amusing rhyming slang,
termed a Richard III.
Ah! It's cos it rhymes, is it?
I thought it was because
they thought your play was crap.
I kind of think it is.
No, definitely because it rhymes.
And yes, Kit, 'tis possible that,
as I awaited King Richard,
who was as ever late upon his hour
due to a lack of fibre in my diet,
I glanced at this Gesta Romanorum.
Yes, in fact, I do recall now.
I remember thinking,
"Goodness, some medieval fellow had
exactly the same idea for a plot as
me!"
What were the odds?
So, what's this three casket
business got to do with a merchant,
anyway?
Is he Portia's suitor?
No, that's Bassanio.
But Bassanio is too poor to marry
Portia, so he asks his mate,
the merchant Antonio,
to lend him some cash.
Unfortunately, Antonio's cash is
all tied up at sea,
so he has to borrow it
from a kindly old moneylender
called Timothy.
Now, Timothy's daughter Jessica is
in love with Lorenzo, a friend of
Bassanio's...
Nodding off already.
Sorry, mate, it sounds like a right
load of overconvoluted puffling
porridge,
if you ask me.
Yeah, I kind of know.
On the plus side,
overconvoluted puffling porridge
has never let you down before.
But people like a bit of edge,
something new.
I've got a clown called Launcelot
Gobbo, which is a very funny name.
But what else?
I need a big, important, timeless
issue to put at the heart of the new
piece.
But it's not as if
a big, important, timeless issue
is just going to come walking
through the door.
Gosh, that was scary!
But also wonderful,
being part of such a
big, important, timeless issue.
Goodness, Kate, where have you been?
At the anti-immigrant riots.
I've been on the
counterdemonstration,
defending the French and Dutch
refugees who have come here
escaping religious persecution
on the Continent.
It's worse than the Dutch church
riots of 1593.
Yes, I fear anti-European sentiment
is getting worse.
Well, they're everywhere,
talking foreign and eating weird
food...
Soft cheese? What's all that about?!
Cheese is meant to be hard.
When I see soft, runny cheese
for sale at market...
Ugh! ..I feel alienated and
uncomfortable in my own city.
The other day, I was confronted
by a furious crowd
because a woman thought I was
concealing a baguette in my tights.
Yeah. Laughable misunderstanding,
of course.
Just pleased to see her.
The times really are turning ugly.
Our maids and matrons protest group
was continually interrupted
by groups of apprentice boys
demanding that we display to them
our boobingtons
and even threatening our honour.
Strange how some men's considered
response to a woman expressing a
political view
I'm sure that in centuries hence
men will be
sufficiently emotionally mature
to reject such patriarchal
intimidation.
Or, if not,
women will finally begin to stand up
to it and name and shame those
responsible.
Blimey, Kate, have a care.
I mean, that could go
horribly, horribly wrong.
I mean, what of jolly banter?
What of harmless japes and japey
japes?
Why, if women were to set out
on such a chillingly threatening
course,
I mean, men would scarce be able to
admire a pertsome bum-shank,
insist upon an overly long hug
with a junior employee
or make creepy observations
masquerading as compliments
at Christmas parties.
Strangely, I think I could live with
that.
In the meantime,
the only comfort we may take
from this awful anti-European
rioting is that,
if ever such an influx of foreigners
happens again,
Government can prepare for it
properly...
..affording extra funding
for expanded community services
and not simply dumping
the incoming migrants
on the poorest areas.
Yes, at least if
those lessons are learned,
then something good will come of
this.
Meanwhile, I can't talk about
prejudice,
bigotry and intolerance of
minorities all day,
I have to find a big, important
issue
to put at the heart
of my Merchant Of Venice.
What do you think of this?
Antonio, the merchant of Venice,
wants a loan from Timothy,
the moneylender.
Antonio - "Can I borrow 3,000
ducats?"
Timothy - "No problem,
pay me back when you can."
It's almost there, I just think it
needs a bit of edge, a bit of
tension,
some issue which divides them.
Well, you can't be worrying
about divisive issues now, master,
because with all this hatred of
minorities and anti-foreigner
rioting,
you're going to be late for the
theatre,
so you'd better give yourself extra
time.
Yes, you're right, Botsky.
We're auditioning a new actor.
Why not come along, Kate?
I'd value the totty viewpoint.
Oh, I'd love to, Mr Shakespeare!
And good experience for me,
since, as you know,
if ever the law be changed
and as a woman I be allowed to act,
then as a strong woman, who is
strong,
I shall straightway announce
that my real ambition is to direct.
I really admire you for that, Kate.
Got to follow your insane delusions.
I truly believe that if you dare
to have a big enough insane
delusion,
then anything is possible.
Where is Will?
This new actor is expected any
moment and Will is late upon his
hour!
Sorry, the anti-immigrant protests
have closed half the town.
Some say it could be as bad as 1517,
when the blood of butchered
foreigners did flow through London
streets
and Sir Thomas More himself
faced down the mob.
You're so old you were probably
there!
Old fart phobic
or bravely challenging old fart
phobia?
You decide.
Yes... But to business!
We are assembled to consider
acquiring this new player,
who's causing quite a stir.
I've asked Kate along.
I thought it could be useful
to get a woman's perspective.
Such a privilege.
As long as she doesn't try and get
the job herself.
We've seen her girlish tricks
before.
On my honour, sir.
There's no honour when it comes to
getting a part, ducky.
I've torn the coconuts off
more convincing girls than you!
So, what are the qualities we should
be looking for in this actor?
Well, shouting, obviously.
And strutting.
Yes, we're looking for an actor
who can shout and strrrut.
I am the actor Wolf Hall.
But I do not shout and I do not
strut.
I have developed
a revolutionary new style,
subtle, nuanced, emoting from within
by means of long, sad-eyed stares...
...pregnant with weary wisdom
and penetrating perception.
Next!
Stay a moment, Burbage,
he may have something.
Here is my Thomas Wolsey.
And here, by way of contrast,
is my Thomas Cromwell.
Now...
SIGHS
...my Thomas More.
Actually, fair play, he gives good
Thomas.
I must admit, he is subtle and
nuanced.
Those eyes, so sad.
And so pregnant with weary wisdom
and penetrating perception.
I imagine audiences will happily
watch the actor Wolf Hall
stare wearily and wisely
for minutes at a time.
Blimey! If we had him in a show,
my plays would be twice as long.
Richard III would be eight or nine
hours!
How good would that be?
Book him, Mr Burbage. Trust me.
Us brainy birds
will go totally wibbly-wobbly
for an actor like that.
This gal's already a member
of the Wolf pack.
Whoo!
Well, he does have a certain
presence, I admit.
Perhaps in smaller roles.
There are no small roles
for the actor Wolf Hall, Mr Burbage.
With a stare as weary,
penetrating and perceptive as this,
every role is a lead.
The actor Wolf Hall bids you
good day.
God's boobikins,
Shakespeare has found an actor
with eyes so sad and weary
and a stare so astute and
penetrating
that every brainy bird in London
will go wibbly-wobbly.
So, 'tis agreed, this Wolf Hall
shall join our company,
and Mr Shakespeare
will write a little part for him
in his new Venetian comedy.
Absolutely.
Curses!
Such subtle and nuanced acting
would lend wings to the Crow's verse
and increase his fame tenfold.
How can this be stopped?
Well...
If there's one thing I know about
actors,
particularly the subtle and nuanced
kind,
is that because they put on
funny voices for a living,
they be in constant fear
that people will think them thick,
thus will they loudly champion
any exotic theorem or obscure cause
that comes their way
in the mistaken belief
that it'll make them look clever.
I begin to see my way.
But first, Will,
let us to Miss Lucy's tavern,
for we actors have a radical idea
to discuss with you
to help the poor refugees.
A benefit night for the refugees,
with all London's leading theatre
stars?
I think it's a wonderful idea.
Don't you, Miss Lucy?
Oh, yes, Mr Shakespeare.
Although, as an escaped sex worker
myself,
I would say legal status,
safe sanctuary,
ruthless prosecution of people
traffickers
and, above all, a global approach
to the causes of the crisis
would be better.
But in the absence of these,
I'd say a bunch of luvvie-kissies
showing off is as good a start as
any.
Then that's settled.
Yes, well, the concert will need a
title.
A day, I think.
We should name a special day.
Well, many a time
and oft during our touring days
did Condell and I perform
the big red nose gag.
Where I took my inflated pig's
bladder and whacked him on the nose,
causing it to go red.
Brilliant! That's it, we'll call our
day Inflated Pig's Bladder Day.
Ah, good!
LAUGHTER
Oh, it's going brilliantly!
And look! Burbage and Condell
are going to do their joke.
Oh!
LAUGHTER
Oh, master, now I'll make thy arse
as red as thy nose!
Oh!
That's so funny!
SERIOUS
Now, recently,
on behalf of
Inflated Pig's Bladder Day,
we visited a refugee area in
Shoreditch.
We saw clogless Dutchmen
begging for cheese and stroopwafel.
Frenchmen so weak with hunger
they had not the strength
to cheat on their wives.
I can't deny that the moments
of harsh, documentary reality
sit rather uncomfortably
against the hilarity
of the bum-kicking gags.
Yes, it does feel like
rather a strange juxtaposition.
Still, the benefit night
is a new art form.
No doubt in future ages they'll have
found a way round that one.
You've got to hope so.
Which means that we have raised
the amazing amount of...
Thank you, London!
Thank you!
Well, sounds like an amazing result.
I mean, I wish I wasn't in hiding
and could have been there.
Nearly £5!
That's a hell of a lot!
ALL: Hey!
Although, not so much
if you consider
that a full great ship of the line
cost the Exchequer about 2,000.
Well, you hear a lot
of that sort of argument
from gloomy naysayers, Miss Lucy,
but five quid's five quid,
and without tonight's benefit,
all we'd have would be nothing.
ALL: Hey!
Except that maybe,
without charity nights like tonight,
people wouldn't be able to think
they'd achieved something
when, really, nothing's changed
at all.
And without that comforting
illusion, they might be more minded
to agitate for genuine political
change, which could make an actual
difference.
I mean, you could argue that charity
affords politicians an excuse for
inaction
and exploiters the pretence
of a conscience.
Still, we raised nearly £5!
ALL: Hey!
But it would be wonderful
to do something more
than just raise money,
don't you think, Mr Shakespeare?
Something profound and timeless,
a lasting reflection
on the corrosive nature
of bigotry and intolerance.
Well, that is undoubtedly true,
but I'm also very busy, Kate.
I'm looking for a truly timeless
and universal issue
to elevate my Merchant Of Venice.
Hang on...
Hang the futtock on!
Mr Hall, if you join the Burbage
company
with your extraordinarily sad
but kindly eyes
and weary, perceptive stare,
you will without a doubt soon become
one of the greatest Shakespearean
players of your day.
That much is certain.
Hm.
This Shakespeare...
A curious thing, is he not?
I mean, who could have imagined
that a mere town-school
spotty-grotty could write such
verse?
That a turnip-chewing, country
bum-shankle
could produce such insight
and such wisdom?
'Tis passing strange. Mm...
One might almost imagine
that some educated posh boy
had writ his plays in secret.
I don't know, a university man like
Sir Francis Bacon or the Earl of
Oxford.
Interesting. Fascinating.
Or Christopher Marlowe, perhaps!
They say he's dead, but is he?
The actor Wolf Hall is intrigued.
He takes the bait, and thus do I
prove one of the great truths of
life and art,
that just because an actor looks
intelligent and can play intelligent
doesn't mean that he is intelligent.
I wonder how Susanna's getting on
with her first day at work.
I'm so proud of her.
Well, I don't think it's fitting,
a maid teaching in a dame school.
Oh, she's only helping out
with the younger ones,
reading and writing.
The responsibility'll do her good,
stop her being
such a grumpy little bitchington.
Where's my tea? I'm starving!
I had to walk home.
Why couldn't Grandad pick me up
in the cart? What's he do all day?
Nothing! I hate my life! Shut up!
Long day, love?
What is this, the Star Chamber?
You're always on at me!
Yes, it was a long day. You happy
now? Shut up!
I actually think
she might be improving a bit.
Well, tell us a bit about it.
Were the boys nice?
No, they're a bunch
of nasty little swine.
There's this one kid
who's a bit different,
you know, what they call a holy
innocent, and they are so mean to
him.
We had a boy like that in my class.
Brilliant!
We used to call him stupid.
Wasn't any harm in it.
We used to play tricks on him.
We used to steal his lunch,
chuck him in the pond
and reduce him to a weeping,
sobbing wretch in the corner.
Wasn't any...
..harm in it.
Actually, when I think about it,
there was quite a lot of harm in it,
which is why I try not to think
about it.
So thanks a lot for bringing it up,
Susanna!
My class is full of insensitive
bastables like Grandad was.
I just wish there was a way
I could make them see
that this kid has
exactly the same feelings
and exactly the same human value
as they do.
Well, maybe you should speak
to your father about it.
He can be very astute
on matters of human nature.
He knows a bit about being bullied,
too.
He started going bald when he was
seven.
I'll put an outsider at the centre
of my Venice play -
despised and belittled.
I'll make him the moneylender
and create an iconic figure
who will stand for all time
as an affront to prejudice and
bigotry.
Such a brilliant idea!
I can't deny, it seems strong.
So what type of outsider
are you going to make him?
Well, isn't it obvious?
I'll make the moneylender a
Dutchman.
These riots are about European
refugees,
and I can't go French
because even my huge brain would
struggle to find sympathetic
qualities there.
So Dutch it is.
Laas, a villainous
but ultimately deeply human
Dutchman.
A tall, blond man in clogs
fond of rubbery cheese
and high-quality beer,
yet somehow managing to maintain
a trim and attractive figure.
Isn't it brilliant?
Hm, I'm not sure.
Then it's a good thing I'm the
genius, isn't it?
So, Antonio has asked for his loan,
and Dutch Laas is reflecting on the
fact
that this same Antonio has insulted
him and plotted against him on the
rialto.
Kate, read it out for me.
You have something of the subtlety
that I believe Wolf Hall
will bring to the role.
DUTCH ACCENT: You hath disgraced
me, laughed at my losses, mocked at
my gains,
scorned at my nation...
And what's his reason? I am Dutch.
ALL STIFLE LAUGHTER
Excuse me, but, Bottom, Marlowe,
why are you laughing?
Sorry, can't help it.
It's the accent.
I beg your pardon,
I do a very good Dutch accent.
It just seems to play against
the timeless majesty of the poetry.
Well, surely that's the whole point.
People are alienated by things
they're unfamiliar with
and thus despise them.
Kate, please, proceed.
CLEARS THROAT
RESUMES ACCENT
If you prick us, do we not bleed?
If you tickle us, do we not laugh?
If you poison us, do we not die?
And if you wrong us, shall we not
revenge?
DUTCH ACCENT: Actually, Mr
Shakespeare...
NORMAL VOICE: Actually, Mr
Shakespeare,
it is quite difficult to get the
required gravitas doing it Dutch.
Yeah, and the clogs are going to
make a terrible racket on the stage!
Also, it strikes me that,
if you still want to set the play
in Venice,
that doesn't work either.
The Venetians don't hate the Dutch.
In fact, Holland's maritime success
has made them trading partners.
Yeah, to be fair, Will,
this anti-Dutch thing
is pretty recent, even in Britain.
I mean, they've been our allies
in the past.
People only hate the Dutch at the
moment.
Damn! You're right.
If I'm to create a timeless classic,
I need a group that everybody
persecutes,
a people who truly encapsulate
the eternal nature of ignorant
prejudice and bigotry.
But who can it be?
A ginge?
Yes, Bottom. Absolutely, a ginge
would be perfect.
Carrot Top,
the ginger moneylender of Venice.
The play will write itself.
Except, hang on, there is
one thing -
the Queen's a ginge.
Mr Shakespeare,
we can avoid the obvious no longer.
We seek a people who are universally
vilified and despised.
There can be only one contender.
Of course,
a Scot!
Don't be ridiculous, Mr Shakespeare.
How can anyone dislike the Scots?
They are perfect in every way,
as they keep telling us.
Think about it, Mr Shakespeare.
What we've learned from the riots
here in London
is that people blame their troubles
on any convenient minority
living amongst them,
and there's one group of people
who are always in the minority
wherever they go.
It's time for another big Jew play.
I am to give my Jew once more.
Oh, joy! Oh, joy!
I shall have a new prop nose built -
huge and hooked and warty.
And I shall hiss and lurk and prowl.
And I'll have a stock of prop babies
hidden beneath my black, sinister
gown,
from which I shall drink stage
blood!
Mr Burbage, the character is
supposed to be at least partially
sympathetic.
Sympathetic Jew? Ha! Are you mad?!
Such a thing has ne'er been known
in all European culture.
That's what's going to make the play
so memorable.
Oh, so do you think I should tone
down the baby blood-drinking bit
or...?
Yes, well, that's kind of the
point.
We're trying to rewrite the rules a
bit on stage Jews here.
Speaking of which,
all this "do we not bleed" stuff,
as if they're the same as us,
I presume you want me to play that
for laughs.
Laughs? Yes, it's a joke.
Obviously, Jews are not the same
as us.
They are a wicked, naughty people.
They drink the blood of Christian
babies and they poison Christian
wells.
They deliberately created
and spread bubonic plague - fact.
But have you ever actually seen
any of these things?
Are you suggesting
all this stuff is made up?
Well, you have to wonder.
I mean, they're supposed to secretly
run the world for their own
advantage.
Well, if that's true, quite frankly,
they're not doing much of a job,
are they?
I mean, they get hounded, beaten
and murdered wherever they go.
Hath not a Jew eyes?
Hath not a Jew hands,
organs,
dimensions, senses,
affections, passions?
Fed with the same food,
hurt with the same weapons,
subject to the same diseases,
healed by the same means,
warmed and cooled by the same winter
and summer as a Christian is?
If you prick us, do we not bleed?
If you tickle us, do we not laugh?
If you poison us, do we not die?
And if you wrong us,
shall we not revenge?
Mr Burbage, Wolf Hall must play
the Jew!
I'm sorry, that's impossible.
I, Burbage, always play the
title role.
Oh, well, that's all right, then.
The title role is Antonio.
Antonio? Yes, Antonio is the
merchant of Venice.
Really? No-one's ever going to get
that. Ever.
For evermore, people will presume
Shylock is the merchant of Venice.
Well, he isn't. Antonio is.
Very well,
then I shall give my Antonio.
And Mr Hall will play the Jew,
my most startlingly nuanced
creation to date.
A villainous character, of course,
but also with human emotions
and even nobility.
Wolf Hall, it is an honour
to have you in my play.
Yes, it is.
Oh, although, of course,
it isn't your play.
Not my play?
You didn't write it.
Nor indeed any of your plays.
What?
'Twas another scribe, I'm certain.
A posh boy, no doubt?
Didn't write my plays?
That's insane!
Burbage, Condell, Kempe,
back me up here.
Well, of course!
But now it's been said, Will,
it's hard to get out of your mind.
I mean, innit weird?
We've seen you write bits of them,
but now doubt's been put in my mind,
um, you know...
I can't help wondering if all that
proof is actually evidence
of a vast conspiracy to hide the
truth.
That you...
..did not...
..write your plays.
Shut up!
Shut up, stop saying it!
By St Thomas's tiny testicles,
the more you say it,
the more I must needs debunk it,
yet the very process of debunking it
lends credibility to the lie.
Get out! I ban you from my
plays forever.
You can go and do panto in the
provinces.
How very rude!
I was only expressing reasonable
doubt.
The actor Wolf Hall bids you
goodbye.
Well, Will, looks like you're in
need of a stage Jew.
Shylock is still not the title role,
Burbage.
The merchant of Venice is Antonio.
Will, believe me, no-one is ever,
ever going to get that.
Argh!
EXAGGERATED JEWISH ACCENT
If you prick us, do we not bleed?
If you poison us, do we not die?
And if you wrong us,
shall we not revenge?!
Oy vey, oy vey, oy vey...
Argh!
AUDIENCE BOOS
Looks like promoting tolerance
and understanding
might be a bit of a bigger project
than we thought.
Yes, Mr Shakespeare.
I fear it may be a long time
before the play's message of
inclusiveness and tolerance finds an
audience.
Actually, I'm not so sure.
My daughter Susanna has asked
if she might use a passage from it
as a teaching aid.
Settle down!
As you know, my dad's famous,
and he's given me one of his
speeches to be recited
for the next village gladsome
gadabout, to raise money for the
school.
And I have chosen one of you to
recite it.
Up you get, Rodney.
SNICKERING
Hath I not eyes?
Have I not hands, organs,
dimensions, senses,
affections, passions?
Fed with the same food,
hurt with the same weapons?
If you prick me, do I not bleed?
If you tickle me, do I not laugh?
If you poison me, do I not die?
Nice one, Rodney.
There's some lovely stuff in that
play, Will.
And those lines Rodney said,
they were beautiful.
And of course it represents
a game-changing moment in world
culture.
You think?
Oh, no doubt about it.
In creating the world's first
slightly sympathetic Jew,
I have set humanity upon a path
which must lead inevitably
to a world of universal tolerance,
peace, love and understanding.
I am literally that good.
Course you are, love.
Do you know, I don't think
your hair's receding at all.
Really, my sweet?
That's encouraging.
No, what's happened is...
..your head's got bigger.